# Installation instructions

The installation of NClosEmacs is a simple manual process of moving
files to appropriate directories and loading the master
{{{nclose.el}}} ELisp file (once) from within Emacs.

The quick instructions herein have been tested under Windows, Cygwin
and Linux.

== Downloading and Installing NClosEmacs ==
A tarball is available for download at the Google code repository
under the [http://code.google.code/p/nclosemacs] project header.  The archive contains ELisp
files, with the .el extension, and an Emacs info file
{{{nclosemacs.info}}}.  They are installed separately.

  * Create a directory to contain the ELisp files (as well as some of the rule base example files provided in the archive), say {{{/home/nclose}}}.
  * Move or untar all ELisp (.el) files in the newly created directory
  * In your {{{.emacs}}} file add the nclose directory to the load path Emacs will use by adding the following line: 
  ** {{{(add-to-list 'load-path "/home/nclose")}}}

This completes the basic installation of NClosEmacs to work with 
Emacs or XEmacs, under Windows, Cygwin and Linux.

At any time during an Emacs session, the NClose inference engine may
be loaded by the usual load file command: {{{M-x load-file
nclose.el}}}.  Rule bases are edited as text files in standard
Emacs buffers and loaded in memory--once the NClose engine itself has
been loaded--by simply evaluting the buffer with the usual command
{{{M-x eval-current-buffer}}}.

If required the loading of the expert system inference engine may also
be expedited at Emacs launch by adding the following line to the
{{{~/.emacs}}} initialization file:

{{{
(load-file "nclose.el")
}}}

NClosEmacs' manual and user interface are described in the
documentation provided in info, PDF, and HTML formats, in the same
{{{release}}} directory.

== Installing the NClosEmacs documentation ==
The documentation is also provided as an info file to be installed
directly in the Emacs info facility, invoked with {{{M-x
info}}}.

  * Locate the {{{dir}}} info directory file for your Emacs installation.  In Cygwin, for instance, it is usually found in the {{{/usr/share/info}}} directory.
  * Edit this file to insert the following line under the appropriate section:
{{{
 * NClose: (/home/nclose/nclosemacs). An expert system for Emacs.
}}}
with the proper location of the {{{nclosemacs.info}}} file in parentheses.

The documentation then becomes available as a standard part of the
info system in Emacs.

== Important Information ==
NClosEmacs is released under the GNU GPL v3, the text of which is
available in this archive as {{{gpl-3.0.txt}}}.

NClosEmacs has been tested with Emacs 21-3 under Windows and Cygwin, with Emacs 22.2 under Windows, and with XEmacs 21-4 under Cygwin.
 
 